El Architecture & El-specs (open for collaboration) (#60)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/EL/el-architecture.md

The client's architecture is grounded in a series of detailed specifications, each playing a unique role in its comprehensive functionality. This document aims to provide a concise overview of the core specification. For a deeper understanding of how all the specifications seamlessly work together within the Execution Layer Client.

# Engine  

The Execution-Layer's Engine that exposes the Engine API to the consensus layer allows for running multiple instances of the execution layer but accepts only one instance of consensus layer , furthermore the engine API uses the JSON-RPC interface over multiple transports , of which HTTP and Websockets are authenticated via a [JWT](https://jwt.io/introduction) token and for ipc communication no authentication is required . Additionally the engine JSON-RPC is not exposed to anyone besides the consensus layer. However its important to note that the JWT is primarily used for authenticating the Payload , i.e. the sender is the consensus layer , it does not necessarily encrypt such traffic , thus its possible for network sniffers to observe these exchanges or attackers to perform [replay-attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replay_attack)

> ## ForkChoice Updated

Reviewer: I assume these are headers to elaborate on?

Author: yes

Reviewer: Got it. In that case, I would create the intro overview with a scheme you are going to follow throughout the text.

## NewPayload Updated

# Boot nodes Network Bootup

# Downloader

# EL's BlockChain

## Consensus Engines in EL

> The execution Layer has its own consensus engine to work with its own copy of the beacon chain . The EL consensus engine is known as ethOne and has about half the functionality of the full fledged consensus engine of the CL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution layer has its own consensus engine to work with its own copy of the beacon chain. The EL consensus engine is known as ethOne and has about half the functionality of the full fledged consensus engine of the CL.
```

> The Algorithm agnostic interface of the consensus engine in EL has these functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The algorithm agnostic interface of the consensus engine in EL has these functions:
```

> | Function                                                                                                                | Beacon (Proof Of Stake)                                                                                                                                                                               | Clique (Proof Of Authority)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Ethash (Proof Of Work) |

Reviewer: This table is pretty confusing and doesn't come with relevant context. I would, maybe, omit clique and ethash because they are not really relevant to EL client design. Then, I would simplify it by explaining what is the function and describing it in the other side of the table. Making it more readable and relevant

| **CalcDifficulty** : Difficulty adjustment Algorithm, returns the difficulty of the new block                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |        |

# Sync

# Downloader

# Transaction pools

> we have primarily two kinds of txPools :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 2 main kinds of txPools :
```

> 1. legacy pools- this in geth contains price-sorted heaps / priority-queues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Legacy pools - mempool of regular transactions, contains price-sorted heaps / priority-queues
```

   where the transactions are sorted by price
   Two heaps are used for sorting: one is based on the effective tip in the next block) and the other based on gasFeeCap. On saturation the bigger of the two is chosen for eviction

> 2. blob pools - this also keeps a priority heap for eviction but there are a few things different about this, the code has an excelent comments section for these [blobPools](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/064f37d6f67a012eea0bf8d410346fb1684004b4/core/txpool/blobpool/blobpool.go#L132) also note that logarithms are used in eviction queues in blob pools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Blob pools - also keeps a priority heap for eviction but serves a different purpose. The geth code has an excellent comments section for these [blobPools](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/064f37d6f67a012eea0bf8d410346fb1684004b4/core/txpool/blobpool/blobpool.go#L132). Also note that logarithms are used in eviction queues in blob pools.
```

> In Ethereum two primary types of transaction pools (txPools) are recognized:

Reviewer: this just repeats the section above?

> 1. **Legacy Pools**: Managed by Geth, these pools employ price-sorted heaps or priority queues to organize transactions based on their price. Specifically, transactions are arranged using two heaps: one prioritizes the effective tip for the upcoming block, and the other focuses on the gas fee cap. During periods of saturation, the larger of these two heaps is selected for the eviction of transactions, optimizing the pool's efficiency and responsiveness. [urgent and floating heaps](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/064f37d6f67a012eea0bf8d410346fb1684004b4/core/txpool/legacypool/list.go#L525)

Reviewer: not just Geth, every client implements a mempool
